---
layout: post
title: The Rustic Style Guide
---

This is the style guide which is used by this blog, and which, in my opinion,
should be used by all Rust programmers. Based on the [winapi] style guide, it
uses block for delimitation. I am in the process of working out all the kinks,
so this blog post is definitely a \[WIP\], but I wanted to get this out to the
world. I hope to get this into rustfmt in the near future, and as an
alternative in the style RFC process as well.

The design of this style guide is to follow Rust's design principles:

 * Fast - Dead simple to follow. You should not be questioning yourself "do I
   put this here? or here?"
 * Kind - Fairly pretty in all common cases
 * Safe - Not bad in the pathological cases

One may look at [pink] for an example of a rust project formatted with this
style guide in mind :)

A note on the name: It's "Standards Rust" as in "the Rust standard style", not
"Standard Rust" as in "the standard Rust style". As far as I can tell, there is
no standard Rust style, although Rustfmt Style is trying.

Thanks to [c74d] for formatting this style guide! They are the best :D

Enough with the boring stuff, now for the style guide!

## Formatting Conventions

THIRD DRAFT. These formatting conventions are a work in progress, and may do
anything they like, up to and including eating your laundry.

### Function Definitions

In Rust, one finds functions by searching for `fn [function-name]`; It's
important that you style your code so that it's very searchable in this way.
The proper format, therefore, is:

```rust
[pub] [unsafe] [extern ["ABI"]] fn foo(arg1: i32, arg2: i32) -> i32 {
    ...
}
```

If the parameters are long enough, you may have to put them on their own line.
This happens if you can't fit the entirety of the function header on its own
line, and the parameters are longer than any other part of the header. However,
if they fit on their own line, just put them there, indented once, with a
trailing comma.

```rust
fn quite_a_few_args(
    first_parameter_is: f64, second_parameter_is: f64,
) -> f64 {
    first_parameter_is + second_parameter_is
}
```

If the parameters don't fit nicely onto one line, split it after the `(`, and
after each parameter, and put a comma after the last parameter:

```rust
fn lots_of_args(
    a_thirty_two_bit_integer: i32,
    a_sixty_four_bit_float: f64,
    a_boolean: bool,
    a_character: char,
    an_awfully_long_named_thing: u8,
) -> u8 {
    ...
}
```

Any time you have a closing bracket which is not on the same line, add the
trailing comma (see Indenting for more information)

Prefer `where` to `T: Trait`, except for `?Sized`, of course, or where
supporting an older compiler is necessary.

### Function Body

For the body of the function, the style is

```rust
if x == 0 {
    Err(Error::XIsZero)
} else {
    match Foo::bar() {
        FooBar::First(i) => println!("{:?}", i),
        FooBar::Second => {},
        FooBar::Error { err, .. } => return Err(e),
    }
    Ok(())
}
```

Note that `match`es are as short as possible. If it does go over the line
limit, then block indent.

Prefer to use Rust's expression oriented nature where possible;

```rust
// use
let x = if y { 1 } else { 0 };
// not
let x;
if y {
    x = 1;
} else {
    x = 0;
}
```

#### Matching

The simplest case is just a single single-expression matcher to a
single-expression matchee, all on a single line: that goes how you would
expect. Keep it all on one line, across the line. `X => Y,`.

If one needs an `if` clause, you can also put it on the same line.

If one needs to block indent the matchee, use `{}` to create the block, unless
it's already a block, *unless* it's already a delimited expression -- stuff
like `match`, `for`, `if`, constructors, function calls -- which you can put by
itself.

If one needs to add more than one matchee, with `|`, put each on it's own line,
and place the `|` at the front. If you do this, then the `if` and `=>` must go
to their own lines as well. You may add whitespace in order to differentiate
matches.

(the first is an actual example from [pink])

```rust
impl Token {
    pub fn ty(&self) -> TokenType {
        match *self {
            Token::KeywordFn => TokenType::Item,
            Token::Operand(_) => TokenType::Operand,
            Token::KeywordLet

            | Token::CloseBrace
            => TokenType::Statement,

            Token::KeywordReturn
            | Token::KeywordTrue
            | Token::KeywordFalse
            | Token::KeywordIf
            | Token::Ident(_)
            | Token::Integer {..}
            => TokenType::Expression,

            t @ Token::KeywordElse
            | t @ Token::OpenParen
            | t @ Token::CloseParen
            | t @ Token::Dot
            | t @ Token::OpenBrace
            | t @ Token::Semicolon
            | t @ Token::Colon
            | t @ Token::SkinnyArrow
            | t @ Token::Comma
            | t @ Token::Equals
            | t @ Token::Eof
            => {
                println!("miscellaneous token: {:?}", t); // example :D
                TokenType::Misc
            },
        }
    }
}

match foo() {
    Foo::Bar(y) => for el in y {
        println!("{}", y);
    },
    Foo::Baz if true => println!("baz!"),
    Foo::Baz => panic!(),
}
```

#### if let

If the condition goes over the line limit, prefer to block indent after the
`let`, and split before the `=` (although it is counted as one block, so if
possible, don't split):

```rust
if let
    ... = ...
{
    ...
}
```

### Closures

Don't put any extra spaces before the first `|`, but put a space between the
second `|` and the expression of the closure. Between the `|`s, you should use
function definition syntax, except excluding the types.

Use closures without the enclosing `{}`, if possible. Add the `{}` when you
have a return type, when there are statements before the final expression, or
when you need to split it into multiple lines.

If the parameter list of the closure is long enough to require splitting, use
the `||` as a block for block indenting. You may choose to push it together
into as few lines as possible.

Putting it all together:

```rust
|
    parameter_one,
    parameter_two,
    parameter_three, 
    parameter_four, 
    parameter_five,
    parameter_six, 
    parameter_seven, 
    parameter_eight, 
    parameter_nine, 
    parameter_ten
| {
    println!("{}", parameter_nine + parameter_ten);
    {
        parameter_one + parameter_two + parameter_three + parameter_four
        + parameter_five + parameter_six + parameter_seven + parameter_eight
    }
}
```

Generally, don't use type hints; however, you may if necessary.

### Indenting

Each indent shall be four spaces. Tabs *shall not* be used.

(note: should the recommendation be for `()` or `{}`)

If a continuing line is required, i.e., generics, parameters, arguments, a
type, an expression, or a statement is long enough to be split over multiple
lines, what's known as "block indenting" is used. Split it after a comma, or
before an operator; and, in an expression, if there is no block, use either
`{}` or `()` to make a block. Usually, you'd just use a `let` variable or two
to make sure that there isn't a problem.

`where` and return types pose a special problem; there is no block. Treat
`where` as an imaginary block, with `where` starting, and an imaginary ending
token. Treat `->` similarly, except that there is no trailing comma, since one
doesn't need any commas for returns.

For `where` blocks, if a generic's bounds goes over the line limit, block
indent the bounds.

DO NOT put any extra spaces.

```rust
if {
    foo_this_is_long
    && bar > long_module::long_function(
        variable1, variable2 + variable3, variable4
    )
    && remaining_condition
} {
    ...
}

fn really_long_generics<
    GenericOne: ?Sized,
    GenericTwo,
    GenericThree,
    GenericFour,
    GenericFive,
    GenericSix,
>(
    param_one: &GenericOne,
    param_two: GenericTwo,
    param_three: GenericThree,
    param_four: GenericFour,
    param_five: GenericFive,
    param_six: GenericSix,
) -> bool where
    GenericOne: 
        BoundOne + LongBound + OmgLongBound + TraitIsVeryLong
        + ThisIsForLengthPurposes + NotForRealPurposes,
    GenericTwo: BoundTwo,
    GenericThree: BoundThree,
    GenericFour: BoundFour,
    GenericFive: BoundFive,
    GenericSix: BoundSix,
{
    ...
}
```

Sometimes, you'll be over the line limit but no single "block" is the longest.
In that case, prefer to block indent the largest block.

```rust
fn pretty_short<GenericOne>(param_one: GenericOne) ->
    Result<Vec<HashMap<IntentionallyLongType, bool>>, ErrorType>
where GenericOne: BoundOne {
    ...
}
```

If you don't need to go over a single line, it's even easier; just go across a
line:

```rust
fn foo<T>(t: T) -> (T, T) where T: Copy {
    (t, t)
}
```

### Line Length

The recommended line limit is 100 characters. 80 and 120 are also acceptable.
Choose one for your project, and stick to it.

### Names

 * Types shall be `PascalCase`
 * Enum variants shall be `PascalCase`
 * Struct members shall be `snake_case`
 * Function and method names shall be `snake_case`
 * Local variables shall be `snake_case`
 * Macro names shall be `snake_case`
 * Constants shall be `SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE`
 * Statics - unsure for now. non-mut, probably `SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE`, `static
   mut`, totally unsure.

### Expressions

DO NOT include a space between a unary op and its operand (i.e., `!x`, not
`! x`).

DO include spaces around binary ops (i.e., `x + 1`, not `x+1`) (note: this
includes `=`)

For comparison operators, where `&T op &U` is implemented, where `T op U` is
implemented: if you have `t: &T`, and `u: U`, prefer `*t op u` to `t op &u`. In
general, within expressions, prefer dereferencing to taking references.

DO NOT include extraneous parentheses for `if` and `while` expressions.

```rust
// NO
if (true) {
}
```

DO include extraneous parentheses if it makes an arithmetic expression easier
to understand (`(x * 15) + (y * 20)` is fine)

Don't allow two binary operators of different precedences to be at the same
indent level, for example, `<` and `&&`. Use parentheses to block indent any
inner expressions which use the operators of greater precedence:

```rust
// (assuming the lines are much longer; this is for demonstrative purposes)
// DO NOT
foo
< bar
&& baz

// DO
(
    foo
    < bar
)
&& baz
```

It looks quite a bit less ridiculous when you have much bigger expressions :)

#### Block expression right-hand side

`if-else` expressions, if you can fit the entirety of the `if-else` block on
one line *with* the left-hand side of the statement, one may put it all on one
line:

```rust
let x = if true { 1 } else { 0 };
```

If the condition fits on the same line as the `if [let]` or `match`, do so, and
then block indent the rest.

```rust
let x = if test {
    ...
} else {
    ...
};
```

Otherwise, if the test is too long to fit on the same line, then put it inside
a block, and block indent:

```rust
let x = if {
    ...
} {
    ...
} else {
    ...
};
```

Unless it's an `if let`, in which case there are no `{}` required.

Note: do not put a newline before the `if` or `match`; put it before the
condition.

### Function Calls

DO NOT put a space between the function name, and the open paren.

DO NOT put a space between an argument, and the comma which follows.

DO put a space between an argument, and the comma which precedes it.

#### Single-line Calls

DO NOT put a space between the parens, and the first and last arguments.

DO NOT put a comma after the last argument.

```rust
foo(x, y, z)
```

#### Multi-line Calls

DO block indent the arguments, so that they are on their own lines.

DO put a comma after the last argument.

```rust
long_function_name(
    long_argument_name1, long_argument_name2,
    &long_argument_name3.struct_member as *const StructMember,
    FourthArgument::new(), FIFTH_ARGUMENT, &sixth_argument[..],
);
```

#### Special Case - last argument is multi-line

This happens if you have a struct literal or multi-line function or macro call
as the last argument to a function call, *and* the first line of that
multi-line construction or call fits on the same line as the function call.
Otherwise, use the multi-line style.

Examples:

```rust
foo(StructName {
    first: first(),
    second: second(),
    third: third(),
});

foo(x, y, vec![
    arg1,
    arg2,
    arg3,
]);
```

### Methods

Follow the function rules for calling. If any method is multi-line, then the
entire method chain is multi-line.

#### Single-line

DO NOT put any spaces around the `.`.

```rust
x.foo().bar().baz();
```

#### Multi-line

DO put each on it's own line.

DO put the `.` before its own method, not after the previous.

DO put the `;` directly after the last method call, if necessary.

Indent the methods up one from the original receiver.

```rust
let x = very_long_receiver
    .method1()
    .method2(
        with_args, that_make, method_2, multiline, foooooooooo, barrrrrrrrr,
    )
    .method3();
```

### as

The same rules for methods, follow for `as`, except that you have to put spaces
around it.

```rust
let cstr = "Hello\0"
    as *const str
    as *const [u8]
    as *const std::os::raw::c_char;
```

### Structs

DO keep `struct`, `[Name]`, and `{` on the same line, even if it breaks the
line limit.

DO keep the spacing as seen below.

DO have a trailing comma.

```rust
struct [Name] {
    foo: Foo,
    ...,
    last: Last,
}
```

#### To Build

If it fits on a single line, you may choose to fit it on a single line. In this
case, DO NOT add a trailing comma, and add commas after the first bracket, and
before the last.

```rust
[Name] { foo: foo(), last: last }
```

If it does not, or if you choose to put it on multiple lines, put one variant
per line. DO add a trailing comma.

```rust
[Name] {
    foo: foo(),
    last: last,
}
```

### Tuple structs

DO have `struct`, `[Name]`, and `(` on the same line, even if it breaks the
line limit.

DO NOT have a space between `[Name]` and `(`.

Write the type list as you would a parameter list to a function.

Build a tuple or tuple struct as you would call a function.

#### Single-line

```rust
struct Bar(Type1, Type2);
```

#### Multi-line

```rust
struct Foo(
    SuperLongLongLongLongType, SuperLongLongLongLongType,
    SuperLongLongLongLongType, SuperLongLongLongLongType,
    SuperLongLongLongLongType, SuperLongLongLongLongType,
    SuperLongLongLongLongType, SuperLongLongLongLongType,
);
```

### Enums

DO have `enum`, `[Name]`, and `{` on the same line, even if it breaks the line
limit.

DO have a space between `[Name]` and `{`.

DO put each variant on it's own line.

DO have a trailing comma.

DO format each variant accordingly as either a `struct`, `tuple struct`, or
just simply as an ident, which doesn't require special formatting.

```rust
enum FooBar {
    First(u32),
    Second,
    Error {
        err: Box<Error>,
        line: u32,
    },
}
```

For c-style enums that have expressions on their right hand side, it is
possible to go over the line limit. In that case, use block indenting without
the block (we realize it's ugly; honestly, we just can't think of a better way.
Don't break the line limit in your own code):

```rust
enum CStyle {
    ReallyLongName =
        CONSTANT_NAME_FIVE * (
            CONSTANT_NAME_ONE + CONSTANT_NAME_TWO + CONSTANT_NAME_THREE
            - CONSTANT_NAME_FOUR
        ),
}
```

Note that the `()` creates a new block.

Build an enum as you would a namespaced struct, tuple struct, or constant.

### macro_rules!

`macro_rules!` formatting acts like one would expect; if the "matcher" goes
over the line limit, block indent it, and if the "block" part goes over the
line limit, block indent it. If, of the two, you must make the choice of which
to block indent, prefer the second.

Use `{}` for the full definition of the macro.

Prefer using `()` for the "block" part of the macro: it is less confusing,
because using `{}` doesn't actually create an expression `block` in rust.

For the matcher, prefer to use `()`. You may use `{}` in the matcher for macros
which are intended to be invoked with `foo!{...}`, but that is not necessary.
(same goes for `[]`)

If you need to create a block, prefer to start with `({`, block indent the rest
of the code, and finish it with `})`.

DO keep `macro_rules!`, `[name]`, and the `{`, all on the same line.

DO NOT use spaces around the `:`.

DO NOT use spaces between the brackets and the expression next to them.

DO include spaces where one normally would in non-macro rust code.

Prefer a single `macros` module, where all of your global macros are defined,
due to order-dependence.

```rust
macro_rules! cstr {
    ($str:expr) => (
        concat!($str, "\0")
            as *const str
            as *const [u8]
            as *const std::os::raw::c_char
    )
}

macro_rules! u8x4_le_to_u32 {
    ($array:expr) => ({
        let arr: &[u8] = &$array;
        {
            (arr[0] as u32) << 0
            | (arr[1] as u32) << 8
            | (arr[2] as u32) << 16
            | (arr[3] as u32) << 24
        }
    })
}
```

Prefer `#[macro_use(...)]` to `#[macro_use]`, except for `mod macros;`.

### String literals

This is, usually, the only place where you would want to break the line limit.
If you have a string which goes over the line limit, continue the string
(although do put it onto it's own line, i.e., block indent it). This is for
searchability.

A string literal which has a newline may have a line break in the string
itself; in that case, block indent the string.  Remember to end each line with
a `\`:

```rust
let long_linebreaked_string = "\
    I am a long string with line breaks\n\
    I am the next line in that string\n\
    Hello!\
";
```

Raw string literals should be used for things like code blocks. There is no
style guide at all for the insides of raw string literals; they are translated
literally, so whatever you need to make the raw string literal correct.

### Namespacing Line Limits

If a module name would put you over the line limit when attempting to reach a
specific item, as in:

```rust
            really_long_module1::really_long_module2::really_long_module3::really_long_module4::really_long_function_name()
```

Do not do this. Use `use` to pull this `really_long_function_name` into your
namespace, or break the line limit just this once. Refactoring is a good way to
get around this problem. If you *really* need to do this, break the line limit.

### Doc comments

Prefer `///`, since it is used in most Rust code. Put a `///` in front of each
line, and place a space between the end of the line comment, and the start of
the line.

If you would rather use `/**`, perhaps for accessibility purposes, do not use
the first line, or the last line, for comments. Block indent the comment
inside.  The final `*/` should line up in the zeroth column.

You should almost always use `///` for single-line comments, especially fields.

```rust
/// Structure named "Foo"
/// This structure is a newtype around f32
struct Foo {
    /// field named x, of type f32
    x: f32,
}

/**
    Structure named "Foo"
    This structure is a newtype around f32
*/
struct Foo {
    // note that, even though this codebase uses /** */ for doc comments,
    // it still uses /// for single-line field comments

    /// field named x, of type f32
    x: f32,
}
```

Only use inner doc comments (`//!` and `/*!`) to write module level
documentation.

Generally, follow RFC 505 and RFC 1574 for documentation style, except where it
contradicts this document; for example, `/** */` is fine, for the purposes of
this style guide.

### Attributes

Put each attribute on it's own line, indented to the indentation of its item.
In the case of inner attributes (`#!`), indent it to the inner indentation (the
indentation of the item + 1).

```rust
#[repr(C)]
struct CRepr {
    x: f32,
    y: f32,
}
```

### Extern

`extern crate foo;`

There's no other real recommendations about this. You may prefer alphabetical
order.

Almost always, put your `extern crates` at top level (in `main.rs` or
`lib.rs`).

### Modules

`mod foo {`

`mod foo;`

Always block indent your mods, unless it has nothing in it, in which case, use
`mod foo { }`.

Files for modules may either be in `./foo.rs` if there are no submodules that
require files, or `./foo/mod.rs` if there are. Do not use `#[path]`
annotations.

### Use statements

DO NOT use braces for single use `use` statements.

DO NOT use spaces around braces for multiple use `use` statements.

`use` as few items as possible, and keep it as far up the chain as is
reasonable. (i.e., prefer `use std::ptr;` to `use std::ptr::{read, write}`).

### Ordering

For `.rs` files and blocks, always use the following ordering:

 * Global Attributes (`feature`, `allow`, `warn`, etc.)
 * `extern crate`
 * the `macros` mod
 * `mod`s which call out to other files `mod foo;`
 * inline `mod`s `mod foo { ... }`
 * `use` statements
 * Types, `impl`s, and free functions, interlaced in such a way that is
   readable and understandable
 * Actual code

Use newlines as required to make your code look pretty.

### Editor Settings

I currently have settings for `vim`. If people would like to add settings for
their own editor, please email me, or open a pull request :)

vim:

```vim
" you may shorten this or lengthen this to as many lines as you like
let g:rust_recommended_style=0

au FileType rust setlocal shiftwidth=4 softtabstop=4 expandtab textwidth=99
au FileType rust setlocal comments=s0:/*!,m:\ ,ex:*/,s0:/*,m:\ ,ex:*/,:///,://!,://
au FileType rust setlocal cinoptions=L0,+0,cs,C1,(s,Ws,m1,j1,J1
```

## Why we need this

 * [Example One]
 * [Example Two]
 * [Example Three]
 * [Example Four]

Please, don't take this the wrong way. I love `rustfmt`, I just hate the style,
and what it does to some specific code. Look at most of the `rustfmt`'d code,
90% of the `rustfmt`d code, and it's fine... but the other 10% is ugly. Really,
really ugly. And, I believe, the `rustfmt` style is pretty confusing as well.
If you'd like to look for more examples, search the rust repository for
`is:pr rustfmt`, and you'll see quite a few.

[pink]: https://github.com/ubsan/pinkpp
[winapi]: https://github.com/retep998/winapi-rs
[Example One]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/35614#discussion-diff-74550692
[Example Two]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/34220/files#diff-4f7de8be158a8761fb58795c75249dc9L24
[Example Three]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/34211/files#diff-68d362312a8dd3bf52387ad1b96cbf53L570
[Example Four]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/34211/files#diff-68d362312a8dd3bf52387ad1b96cbf53L622
[c74d]: https://github.com/8573
